.. _Collaboration policies:

Collaboration policies
======================

Overview
--------

The CS 4 collaboration policies determine if, and how much, you are allowed
to collaborate with other students while working on your assignments.

Please read this document to the very end, because you are responsible for
abiding by all the rules set forth here.  Failure to abide by these rules may
cause you to get sent to the Board of Control (BoC), and that is not pleasant
for anyone concerned.  Therefore, we want to be extra clear on what constitutes
fair collaboration in this course.

.. note::

   In some places in this document, you will read that some kind of behavior is
   **strictly forbidden**.  We are not trying to scare you or intimidate you, and
   we're not trying to be jerks.  We just want to make absolutely sure that you
   know what the rules are, and saying that something is **strictly forbidden** is
   pretty unambiguous.  (We apologize in advance if you find this annoying.)


Basic policy
------------

You are welcome to collaborate informally on your assignments (but not on
exams!) with other individuals who are taking the course, but you *must* write
all of your own code and you *must not* look at other students' code, except to
help them as described below. Copying another student's code verbatim or nearly
verbatim (from a file, a whiteboard, a screen share or anywhere else) is not
acceptable and is an Honor Code violation.  Taking another student's file and
modifying it to make it look different is *definitely* not acceptable and is an
Honor Code violation.  Consulting a printed or electronically displayed version
of another student's code and referring to it while you write your own code is
not acceptable either, and is also an Honor Code violation. Having someone
dictate code while you type isn't acceptable either.  Basically, you have to do
your own work.

Getting advice on algorithms or syntactic details of the language, or
suggestions on how to debug a part of your program that isn't working, is fine.

All of the above also applies if you are getting tutored for the course,
officially or unofficially.

All of the above also applies to student work from previous years.  We re-use
some problems in assignments, and copying answers from an assignment that was
submitted in previous years is an Honor Code violation just as much as copying
from a student who is currently taking the course.

Helping others and the "50-foot rule"
-------------------------------------

It is common for students to want to help other students to write and debug
their assignments.  While we prefer that you go to one of the course teaching
assistants when you need help on the assignments (it doesn't matter which one),
we don't forbid you from seeking help from other students or offering your help
to other students.  However, we do insist on some guidelines to make the
process fair for everyone.

When you are helping another student with their homework, you are acting as an
unofficial teaching assistant, and thus you must behave like one.  A teaching
assistant will not just tell you the answer or dictate code to you; he/she will
help you work through the problem so that you understand what you are doing
wrong.  If you don't have the time or the inclination to do this, *do not
assist other students*.  If you just give them your code, you are violating the
Honor Code and both you and the people you are giving the code to may be in for
some serious consequences.

As a way of clarifying the way in which you can help other students (especially
when it comes to debugging their code), we want you to obey the "50 foot rule".
This rule states that if you help another student with their programming
problems (including debugging), *you must not consult your own code while doing
so*.  Specifically, we ask that your own code be at least 50 feet away |ie| not
visible to you or the person you are helping while you are helping them.  (It
doesn't have to be exactly 50 feet; the point is that you can't see your code
while helping the other person and you shouldn't run back and forth between
your computer with your code and the computer of the person you're helping.)
The slogan of the 50-foot rule is: **"Help them with your brain, not with your
code."**  Please do not try to find a loophole kind of way around this |eg|
projecting your code on a building 50 feet away; that is clearly not what we
mean.  Posting your code on a pastebin-like internet site, emailing your code
to other people, sharing your screen with your code on it, printing it out, or
even referring to it on your laptop while helping someone else, are all clear
violations of the collaboration policy for this course.  Also, we don't want
you to put your code up on a computer in a room 50 feet away from where you're
helping someone and run back and forth, dictating a line at a time.  **If you
can't help them without consulting your code, don't help them.  Refer them to a
teaching assistant.**

.. note::

   *The 50-foot rule only applies when helping another student in person.*

   Helping another student using teleconferencing software like Zoom, Skype,
   Discord |etc| is covered below,
   but one aspect of it is that screen sharing is *not* permitted.

We realize that it's more convenient to ask someone in your house for help than
to walk all the way to the Annenberg building.  A possible solution is to get
to know a TA and meet with them in their dorm room (if they are willing).
Another possibility is to meet with a TA on Zoom or Discord.

Use and abuse of pseudocode
---------------------------

In the past, some students have been called in to the BoC because of very
similar code that was ultimately traced to pseudocode written on a whiteboard
which was almost exactly like the final code.  Pseudocode is supposed to be an
*informal*, *non-executable* description of an algorithm.  If you write or
consult pseudocode which is (say) 80% or more of the way to being actual
runnable code as a way to do an end run around the collaboration policies, be
advised that we and the BoC are well aware of this problem and you will not get
away with it.  On the other hand, if you (or a TA) write out or read pseudocode
which is a human-readable description of an algorithm without any actual code
in it, you are fine.  If in doubt, ask the instructor.

Teleconferencing software (|eg| Zoom)
-------------------------------------

If you use teleconferencing software (like Zoom) or software with
teleconferencing capabilities (like Discord with VOIP), you *may not* share
your screen with other students, whether to help them or to get help from them.
This also applies to non-students (with the obvious exception of the course
instructor or TAs).

Also, it is **strictly forbidden** to dictate code over teleconferencing
software.  This is consistent with the rules in the other sections of this
document.

Discussion boards and chat programs
-----------------------------------

You are **strictly forbidden** from posting code from your assignments to a
discussion board (such as Piazza) unless it's a private message to one or more
instructors/TAs.  If this happens you may lose the ability to use the
discussion board for any purpose.

This also applies to programs with chat features that are not used in the
course (like Slack or Discord), or email for that matter.

Use of websites
---------------

It is **strictly forbidden** to post any of the problems from the assignments
onto websites (for instance, Stack Overflow), and anyone caught doing this will
be charged with an Honor Code violation.  This includes problems that are
similar to assignment problems even if not identical.  If you find a discussion
of course-related material on internet websites, you may read it as long as the
discussion is not about a problem that is identical to or very similar to a
problem on one of the course assignments.  However, do not transcribe code from
the internet into your homework submissions.

It is **strictly forbidden** to look at any solutions to any previous years'
{course} work posted on internet code repository sites (including but not
limited to GitHub, GitLab, BitBucket, |etc|).  It is also **strictly forbidden**
to put your own code on such a repository *unless* (a) it is a private
repository, and (b) you do not allow anyone else access to this private
repository.  You may also not fork any such repositories that you might happen
to find; we will consider this prima facie evidence of intent to plagiarize.

Use of code hinting software (Github Copilot or ChatGPT)
--------------------------------------------------------

You are **strictly forbidden** to use code hinting software such as Github
Copilot, ChatGPT, or similar software for any part of this course.
(This should be obvious.)

Summary
-------

These are resources that you may or may not be allowed to consult while working
on your assignments and exams.

.. list-table:: Resources
   :widths: 40 15
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Item 
     - Status

   * - Course book
     - OK

   * - Course textbook
     - OK

   * - Official OCaml documentation
     - OK

   * - Other OCaml documentation
     - OK

   * - Other OCaml books
     - OK 

   * - Your notes
     - OK

   * - Notes of other students
     - Not allowed

   * - Your graded assignments
     - OK

   * - Other students' graded assignments
     - Not allowed

   * - Other students' ungraded assignments
     - Not allowed

   * - Other code written by anyone else that answers an assigned problem
     - Not allowed

   * - Solutions to assignment/exam problems from a previous year
     - Not allowed

   * - Material posted on internet forums that answers specific problems
     - Not allowed

   * - Material in non-course code repositories
       (Github, Bitbucket, Gitlab |etc|) 
     - Not allowed

   * - Code hinting software (*e.g.* Github Copilot, ChatGPT)
     - Not allowed


Consequences for violating these policies
-----------------------------------------

Be aware that letting another student copy from you is just as bad as copying
from another student, and can get you into just as much trouble.

Finally...
----------

If you have any questions about the course collaboration policies, please
contact the instructor. Do not ask the teaching assistants; they may not give
you the best answer.

We realize that the vast majority of you (hopefully *all* of you) have no
intention of cheating or overcollaboration in any way, and we hope that this
collaboration policy won't get in the way of your enjoyment of the course.

----

.. rubric:: Footnotes

